MssqlMcp/dotnet/README.md, before:

> ⚠️ **EXPERIMENTAL USE ONLY** - This MCP Server is provided as an example for educational and experimental purposes only. It is NOT intended for production use. Please use appropriate security measures and thoroughly test before considering any kind of deployment.

# Mssql SQL MCP Server (.NET 8)

This project is a .NET 8 console application implementing a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server for MSSQL Databases using the official [MCP C# SDK](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk).

## Features

- Provide connection string via environment variable `CONNECTION_STRING`.
- **READONLY Mode**: Set `READONLY=true` to restrict to read-only operations.
- **MCP Tools Implemented**:
  - ListTables: List all tables in the database.
  - DescribeTable: Get schema/details for a table.
  - CreateTable: Create new tables.
  - DropTable: Drop existing tables.
  - InsertData: Insert data into tables.
  - ReadData: Read/query data from tables (with SQL injection protection).
  - UpdateData: Update values in tables.
- **Security**: ReadData tool validates queries to prevent SQL injection and destructive operations.
- **Logging**: Console logging using Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.
- **Unit Tests**: xUnit-based unit tests for all major components.

## Environment Variables

| Variable | Required | Default | Description |
|----------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `CONNECTION_STRING` | Yes | - | SQL Server connection string |
| `READONLY` | No | `false` | Set to `true` to disable write operations (CreateTable, DropTable, InsertData, UpdateData) |
| `MAX_RESULT_SET` | No | `100` | Maximum number of records returned by ReadData |

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Access to a SQL Server or Azure SQL Database

### Setup

1. **Build ***

---
```sh
   cd MssqlMcp
   dotnet build
```
---


2. VSCode: **Start VSCode, and add MCP Server config to VSCode Settings**

Load the settings file in VSCode (Ctrl+Shift+P > Preferences: Open Settings (JSON)).

Add a new MCP Server with the following settings:

---
```json
    "MSSQL MCP": {
        "type": "stdio",
        "command": "C:\\src\\MssqlMcp\\MssqlMcp\\bin\\Debug\\net8.0\\MssqlMcp.exe",
        "env": {
            "CONNECTION_STRING": "Server=.;Database=test;Trusted_Connection=True;TrustServerCertificate=True",
            "READONLY": "false"
            }
}
```
---

NOTE: Replace the path "C:\\src\\SQL-AI-samples" with the location of your SQL-AI-samples repo on your machine.

e.g. your MCP settings should look like this if "MSSQL MCP" is your own MCP Server in VSCode settings:

---
```json
"mcp": {
    "servers": {
        "MSSQL MCP": {
            "type": "stdio",
            "command": "C:\\src\\SQL-AI-samples\\MssqlMcp\\MssqlMcp\\bin\\Debug\\net8.0\\MssqlMcp.exe",
                "env": {
                "CONNECTION_STRING": "Server=.;Database=test;Trusted_Connection=True;TrustServerCertificate=True",
                "READONLY": "false"
            }
    }
}
```
---

An example of using a connection string for Azure SQL Database:
---
```json
"mcp": {
    "servers": {
        "MSSQL MCP": {
            "type": "stdio",
            "command": "C:\\src\\SQL-AI-samples\\MssqlMcp\\MssqlMcp\\bin\\Debug\\net8.0\\MssqlMcp.exe",
                "env": {
                "CONNECTION_STRING": "Server=tcp:<servername>.database.windows.net,1433;Initial Catalog=<databasename>;Encrypt=Mandatory;TrustServerCertificate=False;Connection Timeout=30;Authentication=Active Directory Interactive",
                "READONLY": "true"
            }
    }
}
```
---

**Run the MCP Server**

Save the Settings file, and then you should see the "Start" button appear in the settings.json.  Click "Start" to start the MCP Server. (You can then click on "Running" to view the Output window).

Start Chat (Ctrl+Shift+I), make sure Agent Mode is selected.

Click the tools icon, and ensure the "MSSQL MCP" tools are selected.

Then type in the chat window "List tables in the database" and hit enter. (If you have other tools loaded, you may need to specify "MSSQL MCP" in the initial prompt, e.g. "Using MSSQL MCP, list tables").

3. Claude Desktop: **Add MCP Server config to Claude Desktop**

Press File > Settings > Developer.
Press the "Edit Config" button (which will load the claude_desktop_config.json file in your editor).

Add a new MCP Server with the following settings:

---
```json
{
    "mcpServers": {
        "MSSQL MCP": {
            "command": "C:\\src\\SQL-AI-samples\\MssqlMcp\\MssqlMcp\\bin\\Debug\\net8.0\\MssqlMcp.exe",
            "env": {
                    "CONNECTION_STRING": "Server=.;Database=test;Trusted_Connection=True;TrustServerCertificate=True",
                    "READONLY": "true"
                }
        }
    }
}
```
---

Save the file, start a new Chat, you'll see the "Tools" icon, it should list 7 MSSQL MCP tools.

4. Claude Code: **Add MCP Server via CLI**

```bash
claude mcp add --transport stdio "MSSQL MCP" \
  --env CONNECTION_STRING="Server=.;Database=test;Trusted_Connection=True;TrustServerCertificate=True" \
  --env READONLY="true" \
  --env MAX_RESULT_SET="500" \
  -- "C:\path\to\MssqlMcp.exe"
```

# Security

## READONLY Mode
Set `READONLY=true` to prevent any data modification. When enabled:
- `CreateTable`, `DropTable`, `InsertData`, and `UpdateData` tools return an error
- Only `ListTables`, `DescribeTable`, and `ReadData` tools function normally

## ReadData Query Validation
The `ReadData` tool validates all queries to prevent SQL injection and destructive operations:
- Queries must start with `SELECT`
- Blocked keywords: `DELETE`, `DROP`, `UPDATE`, `INSERT`, `EXEC`, `TRUNCATE`, etc.
- Blocked patterns: `SELECT INTO`, stored procedures (`sp_`, `xp_`), `OPENROWSET`, `WAITFOR`, etc.
- Maximum query length: 10,000 characters
- Maximum result set: 100 records (configurable via `MAX_RESULT_SET`)

# Troubleshooting

1. If you get a "Task canceled" error using "Active Directory Default", try "Active Directory Interactive".

Commit message:

Add CTE (Common Table Expression) support to SQL query validator
Allow queries starting with WITH keyword to support CTEs while
maintaining security validation for all query types.

MssqlMcp/dotnet/README.md, after:

> ⚠️ **EXPERIMENTAL USE ONLY** - This MCP Server is provided as an example for educational and experimental purposes only. It is NOT intended for production use. Please use appropriate security measures and thoroughly test before considering any kind of deployment.

# Mssql SQL MCP Server (.NET 8)

This project is a .NET 8 console application implementing a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server for MSSQL Databases using the official [MCP C# SDK](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk).

## Features

- Provide connection string via environment variable `CONNECTION_STRING`.
- **READONLY Mode**: Set `READONLY=true` to restrict to read-only operations.
- **MCP Tools Implemented**:
  - ListTables: List all tables in the database.
  - DescribeTable: Get schema/details for a table.
  - CreateTable: Create new tables.
  - DropTable: Drop existing tables.
  - InsertData: Insert data into tables.
  - ReadData: Read/query data from tables (with SQL injection protection).
  - UpdateData: Update values in tables.
- **Security**: ReadData tool validates queries to prevent SQL injection and destructive operations.
- **Logging**: Console logging using Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.
- **Unit Tests**: xUnit-based unit tests for all major components.

## Environment Variables

| Variable | Required | Default | Description |
|----------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `CONNECTION_STRING` | Yes | - | SQL Server connection string |
| `READONLY` | No | `false` | Set to `true` to disable write operations (CreateTable, DropTable, InsertData, UpdateData) |
| `MAX_RESULT_SET` | No | `100` | Maximum number of records returned by ReadData |

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Access to a SQL Server or Azure SQL Database

### Setup

1. **Build ***

---
```sh
   cd MssqlMcp
   dotnet build
```
---


2. VSCode: **Start VSCode, and add MCP Server config to VSCode Settings**

Load the settings file in VSCode (Ctrl+Shift+P > Preferences: Open Settings (JSON)).

Add a new MCP Server with the following settings:

---
```json
    "MSSQL MCP": {
        "type": "stdio",
        "command": "C:\\src\\MssqlMcp\\MssqlMcp\\bin\\Debug\\net8.0\\MssqlMcp.exe",
        "env": {
            "CONNECTION_STRING": "Server=.;Database=test;Trusted_Connection=True;TrustServerCertificate=True",
            "READONLY": "false"
            }
}
```
---

NOTE: Replace the path "C:\\src\\SQL-AI-samples" with the location of your SQL-AI-samples repo on your machine.

e.g. your MCP settings should look like this if "MSSQL MCP" is your own MCP Server in VSCode settings:

---
```json
"mcp": {
    "servers": {
        "MSSQL MCP": {
            "type": "stdio",
            "command": "C:\\src\\SQL-AI-samples\\MssqlMcp\\MssqlMcp\\bin\\Debug\\net8.0\\MssqlMcp.exe",
                "env": {
                "CONNECTION_STRING": "Server=.;Database=test;Trusted_Connection=True;TrustServerCertificate=True",
                "READONLY": "false"
            }
    }
}
```
---

An example of using a connection string for Azure SQL Database:
---
```json
"mcp": {
    "servers": {
        "MSSQL MCP": {
            "type": "stdio",
            "command": "C:\\src\\SQL-AI-samples\\MssqlMcp\\MssqlMcp\\bin\\Debug\\net8.0\\MssqlMcp.exe",
                "env": {
                "CONNECTION_STRING": "Server=tcp:<servername>.database.windows.net,1433;Initial Catalog=<databasename>;Encrypt=Mandatory;TrustServerCertificate=False;Connection Timeout=30;Authentication=Active Directory Interactive",
                "READONLY": "true"
            }
    }
}
```
---

**Run the MCP Server**

Save the Settings file, and then you should see the "Start" button appear in the settings.json.  Click "Start" to start the MCP Server. (You can then click on "Running" to view the Output window).

Start Chat (Ctrl+Shift+I), make sure Agent Mode is selected.

Click the tools icon, and ensure the "MSSQL MCP" tools are selected.

Then type in the chat window "List tables in the database" and hit enter. (If you have other tools loaded, you may need to specify "MSSQL MCP" in the initial prompt, e.g. "Using MSSQL MCP, list tables").

3. Claude Desktop: **Add MCP Server config to Claude Desktop**

Press File > Settings > Developer.
Press the "Edit Config" button (which will load the claude_desktop_config.json file in your editor).

Add a new MCP Server with the following settings:

---
```json
{
    "mcpServers": {
        "MSSQL MCP": {
            "command": "C:\\src\\SQL-AI-samples\\MssqlMcp\\MssqlMcp\\bin\\Debug\\net8.0\\MssqlMcp.exe",
            "env": {
                    "CONNECTION_STRING": "Server=.;Database=test;Trusted_Connection=True;TrustServerCertificate=True",
                    "READONLY": "true"
                }
        }
    }
}
```
---

Save the file, start a new Chat, you'll see the "Tools" icon, it should list 7 MSSQL MCP tools.

4. Claude Code: **Add MCP Server via CLI**

```bash
claude mcp add --transport stdio "MSSQL MCP" \
  --env CONNECTION_STRING="Server=.;Database=test;Trusted_Connection=True;TrustServerCertificate=True" \
  --env READONLY="true" \
  --env MAX_RESULT_SET="500" \
  -- "C:\path\to\MssqlMcp.exe"
```

# Security

## READONLY Mode
Set `READONLY=true` to prevent any data modification. When enabled:
- `CreateTable`, `DropTable`, `InsertData`, and `UpdateData` tools return an error
- Only `ListTables`, `DescribeTable`, and `ReadData` tools function normally

## ReadData Query Validation
The `ReadData` tool validates all queries to prevent SQL injection and destructive operations:
- Queries must start with `SELECT` or `WITH` (for CTEs/Common Table Expressions)
- Blocked keywords: `DELETE`, `DROP`, `UPDATE`, `INSERT`, `EXEC`, `TRUNCATE`, etc.
- Blocked patterns: `SELECT INTO`, stored procedures (`sp_`, `xp_`), `OPENROWSET`, `WAITFOR`, etc.
- Maximum query length: 10,000 characters
- Maximum result set: 100 records (configurable via `MAX_RESULT_SET`)

# Troubleshooting

1. If you get a "Task canceled" error using "Active Directory Default", try "Active Directory Interactive".
